All right.
In the beginning of this course, we've been trying to put together this nice universal conception of
reality, one which bridges the gap between different perspectives of reality.
And in doing so, what we were able to do, we're able to erect that bridge such that people have different
information coming in with different perspectives, if you will, can communicate with each other and
sync up on the events that they observe.
Now what I want to do is strengthen and fortify that bridge so that it's more solidified and more applicable
to the phenomena that is occurring and arising within reality.
What we're going to do is we're going to take a look at another phenomenon that crops up again and again
and relativity.
This is known as the Doppler shift.
Initially, we're going to take a look at the non relativistic Doppler shift to review what goes on
in that just in case you have not observed it before, you have not encountered this in physics.
And then we're going to build off of that, that nice foundation to account for relativity and see how
relativistic effects are going to change the observed Doppler shift.
OK.
But in the beginning of the course, when I started talking about this, I said I was initially interested
in started studying relativity again because I was looking at a lot of radar stuff, which actually
makes a lot of use of Doppler shifts in order to observe the velocity and measure the velocity of different
targets that we're trying to detect and observe in reality, whether that be with a missile defense
system or whether that be with cops trying to figure out the speed of a driver, or if your own car
is trying to measure the velocity of a car in front of you, how it's slowly dwindling and using that
for cruise control.
OK, so what we're going to do first before we actually delve into the actual physics is I want to take
a step back and review some key characteristics that are going to crop up again and again throughout
this analysis.
In this video, what am I talking about?
We must understand the physics and the under pinning of waves.
OK, because Doppler shifts as we're going to find out, it's a shift in frequency of apparent waves,
whether that be sound light.
It can occur in ocean waves if you have, you know, a surfer moving with waves, his apparent conception
of the occurrence of those waves.
The intervals between them is going to change best based upon its relative motion.
His alternate perspective, if you will.
So it's important to understand ways.
It's important to understand how we describe him and the different parameters that are used to do so.
So let's just provide a brief overview of that.
I know if you've seen this before, feel free to skip ahead, but I greatly encourage going through
this overview because I'm going to make reference to these terms and some equations in the duration
of the non relativistic Doppler shift.
OK.
So what I have here is a very simple picture of a sine wave.
All right, it goes up.
It's second nature.
We have crests at the maximum points and we have trowels at the minimum.
These are the extreme of the wave, if you will.
OK, so it operates in a sequential fashion because up to a positive value, a negative value, so on
and so forth indefinitely until it gets to the end.
Now, one important parameter that we're going to observe in Doppler, yes, is something known as a
wave length.
As the name implies, we break it down, it's the length of the wave.
So this is the total distance, the exact distance, the length it takes to complete one cycle of a
wave.
So as we show here depicted in the picture, the wavelength, which usually has a symbol of a lambda,
is from the beginning here over to the end.
There you see as one complete cycle and it continually repeats.
So this is the two wavelengths that will be three wavelength in total.
Now, if you any any kind of wave and we're dealing with radar, what you're going to see is we're going
to emit the wave and then it's going to be received at a target at an end.
Or maybe it could be an antenna if we're talking about some kind of communication system.
In that case, you can signify the total length of your wave train, if you will.
In essence, that's just the beginning to the end.
The total length so I have here the length of light wave train and I define it as and the number of
waves emitted or number of wavelength times the speed of light see times the total time transmits.
So if we take a look at this in terms of the units, we can see the speed which is meters per second
times, time seconds.
That gives us the light that gives us meters.
So in essence, all I'm doing is I'm doing basic kinematics, right?
We have Delta X is equal to the Delta T.
OK, so that can give us the total length from the beginning, the trends.
Additions to the receival receive all of our weight.
OK, so I've pure and total no human waste or as A..
We're going to have capital see that's going to represent the elapsed time of serve from this source
to the receiver.
And we also have another parameter which is going to be changing in the Doppler shift.
This is known as the frequency F, and this is how frequent we complete one cycle.
So the basic definition is how many cycles per second.
So that's going to be how many of these wavelengths can you fit in a second?
OK.
So you can also relate this to the wavelength by taking the speed of light divided by lambda.
And if you just take units again, it's meters per second for speed, divided by meters for the wavelength.
That gives you one of our second a cycle per second.
Right?
Because the cycle.
Is for one wavelength.
Right?
So we have those important parameters, and I'm going to make use of them quite extensively in our derivation,
both with the physical intuition based portion of this.
And I'm also going to report repeat the derivation using electromagnetic waves to show you how it just
literally drops out of the mathematics.
But I want you to keep in the back of your mind this definition of frequency and wavelength.
And one more thing.
All right.
I told you and can be related to the time the period.
We can also specified in terms of the frequency.
So a frequency specifies how many cycles per second.
If you multiply that by time, you get the number of cycles, which would be the number of one wavelength,
the total number of emitted waves.
OK.
So you can have these different definitions here, and we're going to make use of them in our derivation
heading forward.
All right.
Next, what I want to do is I want to take some time not doing any computations, not doing any calculations,
but trying to make you feel comfortable with the physical understanding.
I want to build physical intuition in terms of what is this Doppler shift before we actually delve into
what's going on, because if you understand it physically, you can write down the math and physics
pretty quickly and pretty effortlessly.
OK, so let's try to get a grip on what's going on in a Doppler shift.
To do that, I'm going to talk about the formal definition fresh.
So formally, in terms of words, what a Doppler shift is.
It's the apparent apparent change in the frequency EF.
Look at that length of a wave caused by relative motion.
This is where relativity pops them between the source of a wave and the observer.
So in other words, it means that you can have some source that's either moving or stationary.
In the case of radar, we have a stationary source that's shooting our beams, shooting out waves.
You have relative motion of some kind of guy coming in, so you send out the waves.
Initially, if you send out the wave and your receiver was still, you would get the same frequency,
right?
Basically, nothing is changing in the wave.
You get the same exact wavelength every second that would give you the same frequency.
But if the observer is moving, what's going to happen is he's going to see as the wave front comes
towards him and he's moving, he's going to see more waves encountered as he flies through it.
OK.
So talking about that, that's exactly what's going on, but it's easier to understand it if we take
a look at it graphically and to do so, what we're going to do.
We're going to take Terrance and Phillip again.
They're going to do an experiment.
They're going to say, Hey, guys, we discovered this awesome idea of our time dilation.
We've done all these experiments and we bridged the gap between relativity.
Let's see if any other interesting phenomena pops up.
So we're going to have Terence.
He's going to be operating at a radar station at time.
T equals zero.
And he's going to hit a button that's going to transmit some waves.
We're going to have Philip, who's on this plane, is going to say, I'm going to look at it initially,
measure that frequency and then I start wines playing towards the radar and see what happens.
So when he sits stationary at time, T equals zero.
You know, he's going to see the apparent wave that was transmitted by Terence.
So that happens.
He calls out.
He's like, Yo bro, I got the same frequency.
This is exactly what we expected.
We're awesome.
So he gets that that no.
And then he wants to do another experiment.
OK, so next, what's going to happen is going to continue transmitting these waves and it's going to
fly towards the radar station.
And what I have depicted here shows the essence of the Doppler shift.
So what's going to happen is that if we take a time interval, Delta T between two equals zero and T
equal Delta T.
What you're going to find happening is the waves.
If you have light, we're going to travel at this speed.
See right, 3.8 times, three times 10 to the eight meters per second, right?
That's just the speed of light.
So that's how long it's going to take a fly out.
That's the speed it's going to be transmitted.
That's now when Philip flies towards the radar with a velocity of V.
What you're going to find is that after time, Delta T the wave traveled.
Seek out the T.
A fill up decrease, the distance between the wave and his plane by B Delta T.
OK, so he's going to fly in and that decreases the distance the wave has to travel.
So what that means is instead of having to travel this distance, the wave now has to travel that smaller
distance.
At the same velocity.
Right.
So if we have Delta X is equal to u v Delta T.
And the is smaller and the B is constant.
Delta TSB smaller, so that means that if it takes a smaller Delta T to hit the plane, that means you're
going to see more ways hitting it, which would mean you think the frequency or the cycles per second
would increase for that different reference frame.
So it's going to observe a different phenomenon than what the stationary observer Terence actually observes.
OK, so Theresa Philip, they do that.
And Philip, is why he's freaking out here on the plane is like, Oh my God, man, I observe different
frequency.
So this is one way to observe it.
Another way to observe it is to take a look at what happens with sound waves.
Now, I think the most classic example of Doppler shifts that you experience on a day to day basis is
I want you to recall back to a time when you saw an ambulance like charging down the street.
So if you're standing on a street and it whizzes by you initially when it comes, you hear a pitch change,
right?
It goes you.
That change in pitch is exactly the Doppler shift.
Same exact phenomenon that's going on here.
So what's happening is when it's flying toward you with that speed V. It's emitting a wave every x seconds.
But initially, if it were still standing still, if you like to.
Now what's going on here is what they do and the the distance between those waves is decreased by fidelity,
just like what happened with Terrance and Phillip.
So as a result of that decreased distance, that the distance between the amount of weight changes now
when it whizzes by the pitch also changes because it's coming back.
So every time it emits a wave, it has traveled bwt.
So it has to go see the ability plus fidelity, which is an extra distance which lengthens this wavelength
right?
So these little red lines here signify the crest.
And if you increase that distance, you're just increasing the wavelength.
So you can see here, if you increase the wavelength, the frequency decreases.
But if you decrease the wavelength when it's coming towards you, when you're emitting out more as it
flies towards you or you're observing more as you fly towards it.
This wavelength is going to decrease, right?
It decreased by fidelity.
So as a result, your frequency increases.
OK, so this is sort of a graphical representation of a Doppler shift.
I want to beat this horse dead, so I'm going to give you a literally a digital representation of this
right now.
Let's jump straight into that.
OK.
So as I said previously, one of the best ways to experience a Doppler shift is to actually experience
it when an ambulance is blaring its alarms and flies right by you.
What happens in that situation is the ambulance as it's flying towards you, the pitch or the frequency
is higher.
But when it goes by, it suddenly shifts such that it's lower.
Now I want you to experience this firsthand if you have not experienced that situation.
And I want you to take a look at what it looks like on a frequency diagram.
OK, so we're going to you first.
I'm going to show you multiple animations to help bang this concept through into your head.
Make it very simple to understand is first we're going to take a look at the phenomenon.
You're going to hear what it sounds like.
And then I'm going to show you what it looks like, the frequency response and show how that frequency
is shifted, OK?
What we're going to have here is we're going to have a guy who's going to be the source of a sound,
attach a device to his bike and he's going to fly by another individual who is the observer who's recording
it.
Now, as you're going to notice, initially, it's could be an annoying, loud blaring noise.
But as he flies towards you, when he gets really close, you hear the frequency pitch get high and
then when he flies by you, you're going to hear it.
It's going to see your own fly right by and the frequency is going to drop.
OK.
This is the Doppler shift.
I want you to experience it.
So let's play the animation, and then let's take a look at the different frequencies that are observed.
OK?
So let's actually go through the animation.
OK, so here we are the guy who turns on the alarm.
That's what it sounds like.
Now let's go to the reference frame of the observer.
And now, listen,
did you hear that shift in frequency that was recorded by the observer?
So what happened is when he was going by, and this is due to the relative motion of that source frame
the biker when observed by the actual individual who's recording this?
What happens is that that that I've been talking about the distance he travels every time that wavelength
is emitted, that tends to reduce the wavelength between each successive crest.
And as a result of that reduction, the frequency jumps up and you get a higher pitch.
OK, so what we have here on the bottom is the actual response that we saw initially up here.
Right.
It's a nice sunny sort of wave.
And what we're measuring is the time in which this is emitted.
So in the time which we actually watched the video, there were 25 cycles, 25 wavelengths.
Now, if we take a look at the same wavelengths in the observed reference frame, not moving one.
What happens is when it's flying towards you, which is this guy right here, we see that those same
25 cycles occur in a shorter amount of time.
In essence, that t shrink the distance each.
We've had to travel before it got to the observed reference frame.
So as a result, we can have more wavelengths in that same amount of time, the frequency jumps up.
And that's why you have that high pitch.
Initially when I was going towards you, when it passes you and you get past that.
What happens is that VTi adds an extra distance.
Each wave has to go before it reaches you.
And as a result, those same twenty 25 cycles, it requires an additional amount of time to actually
reach the zebra.
So what happens is that length of the 25 cycles is beyond the original length and the frequency decreases
by this Doppler shift V.
So that's exactly what's going on.
You've observed it.
You've heard it and you actually see what's going on here and how that changes the frequency that viti
that relative motion is the key.
I want you to remember that Doppler shift well to motion.
Well combined.
You get this change in frequency.
OK, so we get served exactly what happened.
Let's actually look at an animation that portrays this directly next.
OK, so now that you've actually heard and experienced the authorship firsthand and I give you a brief
explanation, we're going to take a more in-depth look into that situation by looking at a sort of awfulness
situation.
We're going to take exactly what we used with a bike and a sound source.
But in this this case, we're going to a fixed source.
It's going to emit beams.
I'm going to see what those beams look like in the animation and then we're going to take a look at
two scenarios.
Initially, you're going to see the bike riding towards it.
OK.
In that case, we know the frequency should increase.
Then we're going to see the bike running past it, going away for the waves.
We're going to see the frequency decrease once it hits the source.
What's going to happen is I'm going to parallel initially what was happening when it was coming towards
the source and we're going to take a look at both both situations and see how many waves or crests each
bike actually observes.
And what you're going to see is that because of that, we see the bike that's heading towards the source
is going to see more waves, more crests in a given amount of time, as opposed to the individual who's
driving away from the waves, who sees less crests, less waves in a given time.
Let's actually look at what that looks like and see it digitally in the animation.
Let's play it.
So as I mentioned previously, here's the source it's fixed right in the middle.
It's emitting these blue waves.
These described the crest, and in total, when the guy is running towards the fake source, the source
has generated or emitted about, let's see about 20 waves.
So here we see the bike going towards and we're counting how many crests it actually hits.
You can see the guy going towards count way more than the guy heading away because of that relative
motion.
So let's compare the counts at the end close to the end, right one.
It's about to hit the end.
We have generated about 17 in this time period.
The guy that's heading towards the source has observed about twenty four of those waves, and the guy
heading away has observed nine again, as he's just seen in those plots, as I've just described multiple
times.
I hope this bang that you had, I hope you guys understand this concept now when you're moving towards
that source, when the distance between them is closing that bit, that relative motion minimizes the
distance that wave has to travel these blue waves that are coming out.
And as a result, you see more crests.
That's why this guy saw twenty four as opposed to the generated seventeen that we as well as he sees
in that given time period right now, this guy, when he's moving away, that vti, that wave has to
travel that extra distance every time it's generated.
So he doesn't see as many.
That's why he only saw nine of these actual waves as opposed to twenty four with a guy who's moving
towards us.
That's a visual representation.
I hope that drives the point home to make it a bit more simpler.
I'm going to look at one more animation to make sure you guys definitely understand this.
And then we'll jump into a derivation of the actual Doppler shift that is observed.
OK.
So to wrap up these digital animations and conclude our look into the concept of the Doppler shift,
what I want to do is take a source that's moving to the right and take a look at what the waves actually
look like in front of the source and behind the source.
Now, as explained previously, that relative motion helps to change the wavelength of the waves that
are emitted.
OK, so if the distance between that, the wavelength?
OK, so in front of it, that relative motion, if you emit one wave and you move towards the wave,
the distance between the way that was emitted and the next wave that was emitted or the crests has to
decrease.
But that viti right, that relative motion helps to increase the frequency.
So you'd expect the waves to be more congregated in front of the source.
Now behind the source, what happens is you would mean a wave and moves to the left.
C times T.
And then the source moves to the right vti.
So that extra vti increases the distance between the emitted waves that increase the wavelengths you'd
expect.
The density of the waves to be less dense and you have a lower frequency, OK?
So we just saw what it looks like in terms of the blue wave, the group crest blue crest that we observed
in the previous animation.
We're going to see how that is transformed in the front of and the back of.
Now if you're over here and something's moving towards you, more dense waves, more frequency are a
higher frequency response that's going to increase your observed frequency.
If you're behind here and it's moving away from you, you're going to have less dense waves that's going
to decrease the frequency you observe.
So let's take a look at this.
This guy is going to move to the right and we're going to see the waves actually look like instead of
having circular ways that are equidistant from one another as you go out.
We're going to see it's going to change.
So as it moves to the right that we see, you can see right here, the density of the crest is much
higher, the frequency is higher.
So that helps to increase this.
So what I have here is the velocity of the light of the wave.
And down here is the velocity of the source of the wave.
No, the source.
So let's back up a bit.
Voice is the velocity, the source traveling to the right.
So what I have here is we're keeping track of the distance that that was traveled of the first wave
and the distance of the source has traveled.
And what we find here is that in total, the waves may travel vti.
But because of the source, the distance between where it went, the actual length of the wave stream,
which we talked about on the kickoff risks was changed by a distance.
Vesti.
So as a result, these waves have to travel a smaller distance and you have the same amount of waves
that are emitted.
So as a result, the more congregated, the density increases and you could see it right here, right?
I could talk all day about how the relative motion changed the frequency, but here you can see it real
time in the animations.
This drive the point home.
I want you to keep this picture in mind when we run through the derivation, right?
So in the derivation, I'm going to reference the actual length of the wave train, which I'm going
to use, s.t the speed of light here we have.
They used the generic V and I'm going to use the source distance v s t, and we're going to take the
difference of that and use that to derive an apparent or observed wavelength and frequency.
And we're going to find because of this relative motion, it's going to decrease the distance between
the source and the actual observer.
And because of that, we're going to decrease the wavelength and increase the frequency.
I'm going to see that again, decrease the wavelength so the distance between each crest.
And as a result, increase the frequency.
So I hope these digital animations give you another perspective of the phenomenal we're talking about
the phenomenon.
Sorry.
And let's jump into the duration and start digging into the math now that you know what exactly is going
on and you have some physical intuition with the Doppler shift.